Introduce style guide (#88)
projectsyn/documentation: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/references/style-guide.adoc

= Style Guide

The Jsonnet related parts of this guide build on top of https://github.com/databricks/jsonnet-style-guide/blob/30d4d54444c1001ba9561afd7c8de405630a2ca7/README.md[Jsonnet Guide] by https://databricks.com/[Databricks].

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/[image:https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/4.0/88x31.png[Creative Commons License]] +
This work is licensed under a http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/[Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License].

== General Style

* Encode text files with UTF-8.

> * Use Unixe line endings (lf).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Use Unix line endings (lf).
```

* Always end a file with a single empty line.
  This doesn't apply to empty files (for example `.gitkeep`).
* Use two spaces for indentation except for `Makefile` where a single tab is to be used.
* Trim whitespaces from the end of a line.

[NOTE]
====

> Repositories of Project Syn provide an https://editorconfig.org/c[EditorConfig].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Repositories of Project Syn provide an https://editorconfig.org/[EditorConfig].
```

> When using a supported editor, space types and number of spaces will automatically be done correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using a https://editorconfig.org/#download[supported editor], space types and number of spaces will automatically be done correctly.
```

====

== Asciidoc Style

* Don't split senctences across lines but keep them on one single line.
* Start a new line for each and every sentence.

== Jsonnet Style

== Syntactic Style

=== Auto Formatting

Use `jsonnet fmt` to format files. This will fix basic style errors.

=== Variable Declaration

> * Variables should be named in camelCase style, and should have self-evident names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Variables should be named in `camelCase` style, and should have self-evident names.
```

+
[source,jsonnet]
----
local serverPort = 1000;
local clientPort = 2000;
----

* Prefer `local` to `::` syntax for private/local variables.
  Unlike `::`, variables defined with `local` can't be overridden by children, nor accessed by other files.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
{
  // CORRECT
  local myVariable = 3,
  result: myVariable + 1,

  // INCORRECT
  myVariable:: 3,
  result: $.myVariable + 1,
}
----

=== Line Length

* Limit lines to 120 characters.

> * The only exceptions are import statements and URLs (although even for those, try to keep them under 100 chars).

Reviewer: In the line above we talk about 120 chars and here about 100. What's correct?

Author: Fixed: 120 is correct.

> * The only exceptions are import statements and URLs (although even for those, try to keep them under 100 chars).

Author: ```suggestion
* The only exceptions are import statements and URLs (although even for those, try to keep them under 120 chars).
```

=== Spacing and Indentation

> * Put one space before and after operators

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Put one space before and after operators.
```

----
{
  multiply:: function(number1, number2): (
    number1 * number 2
  ),
}
----

=== Using Classes

* Import all dependencies at the top of the file and given them names related to the imported file itself.
  This makes it easy to see what other files you depend on as the file grows.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// CORRECT
local animalTemplate = import "animal.jsonnet.TEMPLATE";
animalTemplate.newAnimal("Finnegan", 3)

// AVOID
(import "animal.jsonnet.TEMPLATE").newAnimal("Finnegan, 3)
----

* Prefer using named parameters, one per line, when constructing classes or invoking methods, especially when they wrap beyond one line:
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// PREFERRED
animalTemplate.newAnimal(
  name = "Finnegan",
  age = 3,
)

// ACCEPTABLE, since it doesn't wrap
animalTemplate.newAnimal("Finnegan", 3)
----

=== File Structure

* Jsonnet files which can be materialized with no further inputs should end with the `.jsonnet` suffix.
* Jsonnet files which requires parameters to be materialized or which are libraries should end with the `.libjsonnet` suffix.
* Files in `lib` always are libraries and must be named accordingly.
  Those files are considered part of a public API.

>   Treat classes and functions accordinglly and lookout for braking changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Treat classes and functions accordingly and lookout for breaking changes.
```

==== Documentation Style

* Use `//` for inline comments.
* Use https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/docblocks.html[Docblocks] to document classes and functions.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
/**
 * Multicellular, eukaryotic organism of the kingdom Animalia
 *
 * @param name Name by which this animal may be called.
 * @param age Number of years (rounded to nearest int) animal has been alive.
 */
local Animal(name, age) = { … }
----

> * Always put documentation at the top of each jsonnet file or library to indicate its purpose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Always put documentation at the top of each Jsonnet file or library to indicate its purpose.
```

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/[image:https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/4.0/88x31.png[Creative Commons License]] +
This work is licensed under a http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/[Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License].

== General Style

* Encode text files with UTF-8.
* Use Unixe line endings (lf).
* Always end a file with a single empty line.
  This doesn't apply to empty files (for example `.gitkeep`).
* Use two spaces for indentation except for `Makefile` where a single tab is to be used.
* Trim whitespaces from the end of a line.

[NOTE]
====
Repositories of Project Syn provide an https://editorconfig.org/c[EditorConfig].
When using a supported editor, space types and number of spaces will automatically be done correctly.
====

== Asciidoc Style

* Don't split senctences across lines but keep them on one single line.
* Start a new line for each and every sentence.

== Jsonnet Style

== Syntactic Style

=== Auto Formatting

Use `jsonnet fmt` to format files. This will fix basic style errors.

=== Variable Declaration

> * Variables should be named in camelCase style, and should have

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Variables should be named in camelCase style, and should have self-evident names.
```

> self-evident names.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

* Methods which return single values (rather than a dictionary) should use parentheses `()` to enclose their bodies if they're multi-line, identically to how braces would be used.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
{
  multiply:: function(number1, number2): (
    number1 * number 2
  ),
}
----

=== Using Classes

* Import all dependencies at the top of the file and given them names related to the imported file itself.
  This makes it easy to see what other files you depend on as the file grows.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// CORRECT
local animalTemplate = import "animal.jsonnet.TEMPLATE";
animalTemplate.newAnimal("Finnegan", 3)

// AVOID
(import "animal.jsonnet.TEMPLATE").newAnimal("Finnegan, 3)
----

* Prefer using named parameters, one per line, when constructing classes or invoking methods, especially when they wrap beyond one line:
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// PREFERRED
animalTemplate.newAnimal(
  name = "Finnegan",
  age = 3,
)

// ACCEPTABLE, since it doesn't wrap
animalTemplate.newAnimal("Finnegan", 3)
----

=== File Structure

* Jsonnet files which can be materialized with no further inputs should end with the `.jsonnet` suffix.

> * Jsonnet files which requires parameters to be materialized or which

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Jsonnet files which requires parameters to be materialized or which are libraries should end with the `.libjsonnet` suffix.
```

> are libraries should end with the `.libjsonnet` suffix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

= Style Guide

The Jsonnet related parts of this guide build on top of https://github.com/databricks/jsonnet-style-guide/blob/30d4d54444c1001ba9561afd7c8de405630a2ca7/README.md[Jsonnet Guide] by https://databricks.com/[Databricks].

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/[image:https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/4.0/88x31.png[Creative Commons License]] +
This work is licensed under a http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/[Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License].

== General Style

* Encode text files with UTF-8.

> * Use Unix line endings (lf).

Reviewer 3: maybe also add a `\n` for clarification?

* Always end a file with a single empty line.
  This doesn't apply to empty files (for example `.gitkeep`).
* Use two spaces for indentation except for `Makefile` where a single tab is to be used.

> * Trim whitespaces from the end of a line.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Trim whitespace from the end of a line.
```

Also add a point suggesting to use a spell checker (at least for documentation)

[NOTE]
====
Repositories of Project Syn provide an https://editorconfig.org/[EditorConfig].
When using a https://editorconfig.org/#download[supported editor], space types and number of spaces will automatically be done correctly.
====

== Asciidoc Style

* Don't split senctences across lines but keep them on one single line.
* Start a new line for each and every sentence.

> * Follow the https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/welcome/[Microsoft Writing Style Guide].

Reviewer 3: According to the Microsoft Writing Style Guide, section headings should be sentence case and not title case, which puts this style guide in violation of itself (cf. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/capitalization#sentence-style-capitalization-in-titles-and-headings).

Author: So much for: the style gets automatically tested.

[NOTE]
====
The Microsoft Writing Style is being enforced with https://github.com/errata-ai/vale[Vale].
The implementation used can be found at https://github.com/errata-ai/Microsoft[errata-ai/Microsoft].
====

== Jsonnet Style

== Syntactic Style

=== Auto Formatting

Use `jsonnet fmt` to format files. This will fix basic style errors.

=== Variable Declaration

> * Variables should be named in `camelCase` style, and should have self-evident names.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Variables should be named in `camelCase` style, and should have self-explanatory names.
```

Maybe better? No strong feelings about this one

+
[source,jsonnet]
----
local serverPort = 1000;
local clientPort = 2000;
----

* Prefer `local` to `::` syntax for private/local variables.
  Unlike `::`, variables defined with `local` can't be overridden by children, nor accessed by other files.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
{
  // CORRECT

>   local myVariable = 3,

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure what the point of having a local inside an object is, contrary to having a private field this doesn't give any extra functionality over a local outside the object, or just directly using the value of the local.

I would do this as

```
local myVariable = 3;
{
  result: myVariable + 1,
}
```

Author: Agreed, functionally those are the same. That is except for the different scope of the variable definition. That is probably something we could discuss for the best practices guide.

Reviewer 3: True enough, I haven't really found a need for having complex scoping in a single file so far.

  result: myVariable + 1,

  // INCORRECT
  myVariable:: 3,
  result: $.myVariable + 1,
}
----

=== Line Length

* Limit lines to 120 characters.
* The only exceptions are import statements and URLs (although even for those, try to keep them under 120 chars).

=== Spacing and Indentation

* Put one space before and after operators.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
local c = a + b;
----

* Put one space after commas.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
["a", "b", "c"] // CORRECT

["a","b","c"] // INCORRECT
----

* Put one space after colons.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
{
  // CORRECT
  foo:: "bar",
  baz: "taz",
  { hello: "world" },

  // INCORRECT
  foo :: "bar",
  baz:"taz",
  { hello : "world" },
}
----

* Put one space or line brake after opening curly brackets and before closing curly brackets.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// CORRECT
local foo = { hello: "world" };
local bar = {
  hello: "world",
};

// INCORRECT
local baz = {hello: "world"};
----

> 

Reviewer 3: Probably needs a section on arrays as well (no space after `[` and before `]`), otherwise `jsonnet fmt` will complain with the default settings. Or we could consider turning on `--pad-arrays` for `jsonnet fmt`, which would make single-line arrays follow the same style as single-line objects. Personally I prefer padded arrays.

Also (as I just figured out while playing with `jsonnet fmt`) no trailing commas in single-line objects or arrays

* Use 2-space indentation in general.

* Only method or class parameter declarations use 4-space indentation, to visually differentiate parameters from method body.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// CORRECT
local multiply(
    number1,
    number2) = {
  result: number1 * number 2
}
----

* Omit vertical alignment.
  They draw attention to the wrong parts of the code and result in hard to review pull requests due to the white space changes.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// Don't align vertically
local plus     = "+";
local minus    = "-";
local multiply = "*";

// Do the following
local plus = "+";
local minus = "-";
local multiply = "*";
----

=== Blank Lines (Vertical Whitespace)

* A single blank line appears:
** Within method bodies, as needed to create logical groupings of statements.
** Optionally before the first member or after the last member of a class or method.

> * Use one or two blank line(s) to separate class definitions.

Reviewer 3: More generally, use one or two blank line(s) to separate logical blocks in files. Those blocks can be single function definitions or groups of local variables that semantically belong together.

* Excessive number of blank lines is discouraged.

=== Defining and Using Abstractions

> ==== Defining Classes

Reviewer 3: This should be higher up, as we refer to this definition of "classes" in the previous section. This is quite confusing, especially without an xref.

> * Rather than defining a concrete JSON file, it's often useful to define a template which takes some set of parameters before being materialized into JSON.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Rather than defining a concrete JSON object, it's often useful to define a template which takes some set of parameters before being materialized into JSON.
```

>   We can liken named functions which take a set of parameters and result in a fixed scheme to ``classes'' in object-oriented languages, and so we will use that terminology.

Reviewer 3: I would prefer following Jsonnet upstream in calling this type of functions "templates" rather than classes (cf. https://jsonnet.org/learning/tutorial.html#oo).

> * When defining a class, use the following syntax:

Reviewer 3: Should we consider having the opening curly brace on a new line for class definitions and indenting the definition to make it visually more clear as a block? This would make it more uniform if you have some more complex code in the class "constructor" before returning the new object.

The trivial example in the style guide would then look as follows:

```
local newAnimal(name, age) =
  {
    name: name,
    age: age,
  };
```

See https://github.com/projectsyn/component-backup-k8up/blob/20cb55a5f41259577ef7c87277372d7be47db742/lib/backup-k8up.libjsonnet#L28-L67 for a non-trivial example.

After testing `jsonnet fmt`, this indentation style appears to be the default behavior if the opening brace is on a new line:

```
simon@phoenix:~ $ cat fmt.jsonnet 
local test =
{
  x: 1,
};
{}
simon@phoenix:~ $ jsonnet fmt fmt.jsonnet 
local test =
  {
    x: 1,
  };
{}
```

+
[source,jsonnet]
----
local newAnimal(name, age) = {
  name: name,
  age: age,
};
{

>   newAnimal:: newAnimal,

Reviewer 3: Is the double-colon intended here? It doesn't make a functional difference, unless used in an object that will be materialized.

}
----

> * Returning a dictionary with a `newXxx` method (rather than just returning the constructor directly) allows exposing constants, static methods, or related class constructors from the same file.
>   In other words, it allows extending this class in the future without refactoring all downstream consumers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* When writing libraries, always return a single object encapsulating any methods instead of returning a single method.
  This allows returning multiple values (constants, static methods or class constructors) from a single library.
  Additionally this ensures libraries remain extensible without having to refactor all consumers.
```

* When defining a class with both required and optional parameters, put required parameters first.
  Optional parameters should have a default, or `null` if a sentinel value is needed.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
local newAnimal(name, age, isCat = true) = { ... }
----

> * Wrap parameter declarations by putting one per line with 2 extra spaces of indentation, to differentiate from the method body.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Wrap parameter declarations by putting one parameter per line with 2 extra spaces of indentation, to differentiate from the method body.
```

While doing the first pass I didn't even read the "one per line", so repeating the word parameter should emphasize the intent of the statement.

Should we explicitly disallow keeping the first parameter just after the opening parenthesis? This is not really covered by the current statement.

Additionally, I would like to require having the opening curly brace on a new line at the very minimum for functions with wrapped parameters.

  Doing this is always acceptable, even if the definition would not wrap.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
local newAnimal(
    name,
    age,
    isCat = true) = {
  name: name,
  …
}
----

> == Defining Methods

Reviewer 3: Jsonnet upstream calls them functions, I would propose to use their terminology where possible. (See https://jsonnet.org/learning/tutorial.html#functions).

* Method definitions follow the same syntactic style as class definitions.

> * Methods defined within a class should always be defined with `::`, as they fail to render with `:`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* When adding functions to objects that are intended to be materialized, make sure to add them as hidden fields with `::` as Jsonnet will fail when trying to materialize a function object.
```

I think this is only relevant when adding functions to an object which will be materialized. 

So far I haven't found a use-case for such an object, as generally we only return objects containing functions from libraries.

> * Methods which return single values (rather than a dictionary) should use parentheses `()` to enclose their bodies if they're multi-line, identically to how braces would be used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Methods which return single values (rather than an object) should use parentheses `()` to enclose their bodies if they're multi-line, identically to how braces would be used.
```

+
[source,jsonnet]
----
{

>   multiply:: function(number1, number2): (

Reviewer 3: Could be done much simpler as

```
{
  multiply(number1, number2): (
    number1 * number2
  ),
}
```

    number1 * number 2
  ),
}
----

=== Using Classes

* Import all dependencies at the top of the file and given them names related to the imported file itself.
  This makes it easy to see what other files you depend on as the file grows.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// CORRECT

> local animalTemplate = import "animal.jsonnet.TEMPLATE";

Reviewer 3: what's up with the `.TEMPLATE` in the import here?

Shouldn't this be `import "animal.libjsonnet"` to make the style guide adhere to itself? We state later on that libraries should have extension `.libjsonnet`.

animalTemplate.newAnimal("Finnegan", 3)

// AVOID
(import "animal.jsonnet.TEMPLATE").newAnimal("Finnegan, 3)
----

> * Prefer using named parameters, one per line, when constructing classes or invoking methods, especially when they wrap beyond one line:

Reviewer 3: Not too sure about making the very verbose variant the preferred option for calling functions. But maybe that's just me.

+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// PREFERRED
animalTemplate.newAnimal(
  name = "Finnegan",
  age = 3,
)

// ACCEPTABLE, since it doesn't wrap
animalTemplate.newAnimal("Finnegan", 3)
----

=== File Structure

* Jsonnet files which can be materialized with no further inputs should end with the `.jsonnet` suffix.

> * Jsonnet files which requires parameters to be materialized or which are libraries should end with the `.libjsonnet` suffix.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Jsonnet files which require parameters to be materialized or which are libraries should end with the `.libjsonnet` suffix.
```

> * Files in `lib` always are libraries and must be named accordingly.

Reviewer 3: Maybe add something like "Files in `lib` should never be materialized."

  Those files are considered part of a public API.

>   Treat classes and functions accordingly and lookout for breaking changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Treat classes and functions in libraries accordingly and look out for breaking changes.
```

==== Documentation Style

* Use `//` for inline comments.
* Use https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/docblocks.html[Docblocks] to document classes and functions.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
/**
 * Multicellular, eukaryotic organism of the kingdom Animalia
 *
 * @param name Name by which this animal may be called.

>  * @param age Number of years (rounded to nearest int) animal has been alive.

Reviewer 3: ```
@returns an object describing the animal.
```

* Always end a file with a single `\n`.
  This doesn't apply to empty files (for example `.gitkeep`).
* Use two spaces for indentation except for `Makefile` where a single tab is to be used.
* Trim whitespace from the end of a line.

[NOTE]
====
Repositories of Project Syn provide an https://editorconfig.org/[EditorConfig].
When using a https://editorconfig.org/#download[supported editor], space types and number of spaces will automatically be done correctly.
====

== Asciidoc style

* Don't split sentences across lines but keep them on one single line.
* Start a new line for each and every sentence.
* Follow the https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/welcome/[Microsoft Writing Style Guide].

[NOTE]
====
The Microsoft Writing Style is being enforced with https://github.com/errata-ai/vale[Vale].
The implementation used can be found at https://github.com/errata-ai/Microsoft[errata-ai/Microsoft].
====

== Jsonnet style

== Syntactic style

=== Auto formatting

Use `jsonnet fmt` to format files. This will fix basic style errors.

[IMPORTANT]
====
Jsonnet auto formatter is available in different flavours (`jsonnet fmt`, `jsonnetfmt`).
They do have different option defaults.

> Use eighter with the following options:

Reviewer 4: Typo, `either`

[NOTE]
====
The Microsoft Writing Style is being enforced with https://github.com/errata-ai/vale[Vale].
The implementation used can be found at https://github.com/errata-ai/Microsoft[errata-ai/Microsoft].
====

== Jsonnet style

== Syntactic style

=== Auto formatting

Use `jsonnetfmt` with the `--pad-arrays` option to format files.
This will fix basic style errors.

[IMPORTANT]
====
Jsonnet is available in two implementations (https://github.com/google/jsonnet[jsonnet] and https://github.com/google/go-jsonnet[go-jsonnet]).
Within the automated builds, we use the https://hub.docker.com/r/bitnami/jsonnet[Jsonnet docker image by Bitnami].
Should there be any discrepancies between versions and flavours, the one packaged by Bitnami is the reference.
====

=== Variable declaration

* Variables should be named in `camelCase` style, and should have self-explanatory names.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
local serverPort = 1000;
local clientPort = 2000;
----

* Prefer `local` to `::` syntax for private/local variables.
  Unlike `::`, variables defined with `local` can't be overridden by children, nor accessed by other files.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
{
  // CORRECT

>   local myVariable = 3,

Reviewer 3: Does this even work?

Author: Except from the  duplicated `result:`, this does work.

Author: I updated the example so it does work.

  foo:: "bar",
  baz: "taz",
  { hello: "world" },

  // INCORRECT
  foo :: "bar",
  baz:"taz",
  { hello : "world" },
}
----

* Put one space or line break after `{` and before `}`.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// CORRECT
local foo = { hello: "world" };
local bar = {
  hello: "world",
};

// INCORRECT
local baz = {hello: "world"};
----

* Put one space or line break after `[` and before `]`.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// CORRECT
local foo = [ "a", "b" ] ;
local bar = [
  "a",
  "b",
];

// INCORRECT
local baz = ["a", "b"];
----

* Start objects on the same line as the variables they're assigned to.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// PREFERRED
local foo = { hello: "world" };
local bar = {
  hello: "world",
};

// ACCEPTABLE
local baz =
  {
    hello: "world",
  };
----

* Objects within a conditional start on the same line as the condition.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// PREFERRED
local foo(x) =
  if x == 42 then {
    result: "The Answer",
  }
  else {
    result: "Don't know",
  };

// ACCEPTABLE
local bar(x) =
  if x == 42 then
    {
      result: "The Answer",
    }
  else
    {
      result: "Don't know",
    };
----

* Start `if` and `else` on new lines and prefer to keep `else if` together.
+

> [sourece,jsonnet]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[source,jsonnet]
```

----
// PREFERRED
local foo(x) =
  if x < 42 then {
    result: "No enought",
  }
  else if > 42 then {
    result: "Too much",
  }
  else {
    result: "The Answer",
  }

// ACCEPTABLE
local bar(x) =
  if x < 42 then {
    result: "No enought",
  }
  else
    if > 42 then {
      result: "Too much",
    }
    else {
      result: "The Answer",
    }
----

* Omit tailing `,` on single line arrays and objects.
  Keep them when splitting over multiple lines.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// CORRECT
local a = [ "a", "b" ] ;
local b = { hello: "world" };
local c =
  [
    "a",
    "b",
  ];
local d =
  {
    hello: "world",
  };

// INCORRECT
local e = [ "a", "b", ];
local f = { hello: "world", };
----

* Use 2-space indentation in general.

* Only function parameter declarations use 4-space indentation, to visually differentiate parameters from function body.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// CORRECT
local multiply(
    number1,
    number2) =
  {
    result: number1 * number 2
  }
----

* Omit vertical alignment.

>   They draw attention to the wrong parts of the code and result in hard to review pull requests due to the white space changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Having vertical alignment results in hard to review pull requests due to the white space changes.
```

+
[source,jsonnet]
----

> // Don't align vertically

Reviewer 3: Align example with others using `// CORRECT` and `// INCORRECT`

local plus     = "+";
local minus    = "-";
local multiply = "*";

// Do the following
local plus = "+";
local minus = "-";
local multiply = "*";
----

=== Blank lines (vertical whitespace)

* A single blank line appears:
** Within functions bodies, as needed to create logical groupings of statements.
** Optionally before the first member or after the last member of a template or function.
* Use one or two blank line(s) to separate logical blocks in files.
  Those blocks can be single function definitions or groups of local variables that semantically belong together.

> * Excessive number of blank lines is discouraged.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Excessive use of blank lines is discouraged.
```

=== Defining and using abstractions

==== Defining templates

> * Rather than defining a concrete JSON object, it's often useful to define a template which takes some set of parameters before being materialized into JSON.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Rather than defining a concrete JSON object, it's often useful to define a template which takes a set of parameters.
  Such templates can be used to parametrize JSON objects that need to be materialized multiple times with only small changes.
```

+
[INFO]
====
Looking at this from the perspective of object oriented programming, this looks like a class.
However it differs from classes, as the resulting objects don't have methods.
From the Jsonnet perspective, this is just a regular function.
When specifically referring to this type of function, use the term _template function_.
====
* When defining a template function, use the following syntax:
+
[source,jsonnet]
----

> local newAnimal(name, age) =

Reviewer 3: Update example to follow previoulsy defined style recommendations ("Start objects on the same line as the variables they're assigned to.").

  The exception to this rule is the last object within a library file.
* Functions which return single values (rather than an object) should use parentheses `()` to enclose their bodies if they're multi-line, identically to how braces would be used.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
{
  multiply(number1, number2):
    (
      number1 * number 2
    ),
}
----

=== Using libraries

* Import all dependencies at the top of the file and given them names related to the imported file itself.
  This makes it easy to see what other files you depend on as the file grows.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// CORRECT
local animal = import "animal.libsonnet";
animal.newAnimal("Finnegan", 3);

// AVOID
(import "animal.libsonnet").newAnimal("Finnegan, 3);
----

* Keep function parameters on a single line or put one parameter per line when calling functions.
* When putting one parameter per line for a function call, add a line break (`\n`) after the opening `(`.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// CORRECT
animal.newAnimal("Finnegan", 3);
animal.newAnimal(
  name = "Finnegan",
  age = 3,
);
animal.newAnimal(
  "Finnegan",
  3,
);

// INCORRECT
animal.newAnimal("Finnegan",
  3,
  42,
);
----

=== File structure

> * Jsonnet files which can be materialized with no further inputs should end with the `.jsonnet` suffix.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Jsonnet files which are intended to be materialized should end with the `.jsonnet` suffix.
```

> * Jsonnet files which require parameters to be materialized or which are libraries should end with the `.libjsonnet` suffix.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Jsonnet files which are not intended to be materialized -- usually libraries -- should end with the `.libjsonnet` suffix.
```

* Files in `lib` always are libraries which should never be materialized and must be named accordingly.
  Those files are considered part of a public API.

>   Treat functions in libraries accordingly and look out for breaking changes.

Reviewer 3: Now that I read this again with fresh-ish eyes, these three statements are not really Jsonnet style guide content, and are much more about Commodore component directory layout than Jsonnet style.

Author: So you do suggest to remove them? Where should they go instead?

Author: We leave them for now. Should we find a better home for them, we can move them at any time.

==== Documentation style

* Use `//` for inline comments.

> * Use https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/docblocks.html[Docblocks] to document functions.

Reviewer 3: TODO: decide if we standardize on `@` or `\` as the leader for Doxygen keywords, Doxygen supports both variants.

Author: This is easy. All existing code use `\`. So we go with that.

+
[source,jsonnet]
----
/**
 * Multicellular, eukaryotic organism of the kingdom Animalia
 *
 * @param name Name by which this animal may be called.
 * @param age Number of years (rounded to nearest int) animal has been alive.
 * @returns an object describing the animal.
 */
local Animal(name, age) = { … }
----

> * Always put documentation at the top of each Jsonnet file or library to indicate its purpose.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Put a  https://www.doxygen.nl/manual/docblocks.html[Docblock] at the top of each Jsonnet file or library to indicate its purpose.
```

And an example (might be helpful to get an idea of what we expect from top-level documentation):

```
/**
  * \file widgetpatch.libjsonnet
  *
  * The widget patching library provides functions to adjust the content of prepackaged widgets.
  *
  * Generally, functions will return a widget patch which can be merged with a Widget to make the corresponding adjustment.
  *
  * For example, you can configure the widget's owner with `AddOwner`:
  *
  * \code
  * local wpatch = import "widgetpatch.libjsonnet";
  *
  * local thewidget = inventory.widget_a + wpatch.AddOwner('Synthesizer');
  * \endcode
  *
  * See the individual function documentation for detailed explanation of each function's behavior.
  */

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/[image:https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/4.0/88x31.png[Creative Commons License]] +
This work is licensed under a http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/[Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License].

== General Style

* Encode text files with UTF-8.
* Use Unixe line endings (lf).

> * Always end a file with a single empty line.

Reviewer 3: Please make sure that this means just a trailing `\n` and in no circumstances `\n\n`.

  This doesn't apply to empty files (for example `.gitkeep`).
* Use two spaces for indentation except for `Makefile` where a single tab is to be used.
* Trim whitespaces from the end of a line.

[NOTE]
====
Repositories of Project Syn provide an https://editorconfig.org/c[EditorConfig].
When using a supported editor, space types and number of spaces will automatically be done correctly.
====

== Asciidoc Style

> * Don't split senctences across lines but keep them on one single line.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Don't split sentences across lines but keep them on one single line.
```

I personally really don't like this style, as I dislike long lines.

Use `jsonnet fmt` to format files. This will fix basic style errors.

=== Variable Declaration

* Variables should be named in camelCase style, and should have
self-evident names.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
local serverPort = 1000;
local clientPort = 2000;
----

* Prefer `local` to `::` syntax for private/local variables.
  Unlike `::`, variables defined with `local` can't be overridden by children, nor accessed by other files.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
{
  // CORRECT
  local myVariable = 3,
  result: myVariable + 1,

  // INCORRECT
  myVariable:: 3,
  result: $.myVariable + 1,
}
----

=== Line Length

* Limit lines to 120 characters.
* The only exceptions are import statements and URLs (although even for those, try to keep them under 100 chars).

=== Spacing and Indentation

* Put one space before and after operators
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
local c = a + b;
----

* Put one space after commas.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
["a", "b", "c"] // CORRECT

["a","b","c"] // INCORRECT
----

* Put one space after colons.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
{
  // CORRECT
  foo:: "bar",
  baz: "taz",
  { hello: "world" },

  // INCORRECT
  foo :: "bar",
  baz:"taz",
  { hello : "world" },
}
----

> * Put one space or line brake after opening curly brackets and before closing curly brackets.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Put one space or line break after opening curly brackets and before closing curly brackets.
```
"curly brackets" sounds odd to me, I'm more used to calling them "curly braces" or just "braces", which appears to be a common term in the US and UK at least.

+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// CORRECT
local foo = { hello: "world" };
local bar = {
  hello: "world",
};

// INCORRECT
local baz = {hello: "world"};
----

* Use 2-space indentation in general.

> * Only method or class parameter declarations use 4-space indentation, to visually differentiate parameters from method body.

Reviewer 3: What "classes" are we talking about here? Regardless of terminology (see below), this point needs an xref to "Defining and Using Abstractions".

* Don't split senctences across lines but keep them on one single line.
* Start a new line for each and every sentence.
* Follow the https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/welcome/[Microsoft Writing Style Guide].

[NOTE]
====
The Microsoft Writing Style is being enforced with https://github.com/errata-ai/vale[Vale].

> The implementation used can be found at https://github.com/errata-ai/Microsoft[ errata-ai/Microsoft]a.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implementation used can be found at https://github.com/errata-ai/Microsoft[errata-ai/Microsoft].
```

Use `jsonnet fmt` to format files. This will fix basic style errors.

[IMPORTANT]
====
Jsonnet auto formatter is available in different flavours (`jsonnet fmt`, `jsonnetfmt`).
They do have different option defaults.
Use eighter with the following options:

* `--indent 2`
* `--max-blank-lines 2`
* `--string-style d`

> * `--comant-style s`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `--comment-style s`
```

}
----

* Put one space or line break after `{` and before `}`.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// CORRECT
local foo = { hello: "world" };
local bar =

>   {

Reviewer 2: Not very happy about this one. It creates more indent and is less readable in my opinion...

Reviewer 2: Ah sorry, misunderstood the rule.

Reviewer 4: I agree

Reviewer 3: It's not noticeable with the simple example, but for more complex examples, I find that this style actually massively improves readability, as the block is visually much more clear.

I'm fine with allowing both, but I find the variant with the opening curly brace just after the `=` much less readable than the variant which has the opening curly brace on it's own line, especially when the object becomes bigger, see for example https://github.com/projectsyn/component-backup-k8up/blob/20cb55a5f41259577ef7c87277372d7be47db742/lib/backup-k8up.libjsonnet#L207-L228

In any case the indentation is absolutely required for visual clarity when the value of a local variable consists of multiple statements. Consider the following two examples:

```
local bar = 
local baz = 3;
{ bar: baz };
```

```
local bar = 
  local baz = 3;
  { bar: baz };
```

Or to completely over-do it (this still compiles just fine):

```
local bar = local baz = 3;
{ bar: baz };

{ foo: bar }
```
```
$ jsonnet test.jsonnet
{
   "foo": {
      "bar": 3
   }
}
```

Reviewer 3: After discussion with @srueg we think we should have the following for variables holding a single object.

```
// PREFERRED
local foo = { bar: 1 };
local foo = {
  bar: 1,
};

// ACCEPTABLE
local foo =
  {
    bar: 1,
  };
```

If the value of a local or field is a larger block we should have the following guide lines:

```
// PREFERRED
local foo = {
  local bar = 3;
  baz: bar,
};
local foo(x) =  {
  local bar(y) = if y < 5 then {
    baz: '<5'
  } else {
    baz: '>=5'
  };
  result: bar(x),
};

// ACCEPTABLE
local foo =
  local bar = 3;
  {
      baz: bar,
  };

// DISALLOWED
local foo =
local bar = 3;
{
  baz: bar,
};
local foo =
{
  local bar = 3;
  baz: bar,
};
local foo(x) =
  local bar(y) = if y < 5 then
  {
    baz: '<5'
  }
  else { baz: '>=5' };
  {
    result: bar(x),
  };
```

Author: Defining local variables within an object is not possible. This resulted in the rule to start objects on the same line as the variable itself. Everything else is automatically defined by the formatter.

On top of this, I discussed conditionals with @simu. We also came up with something related to them that is aligned with how object assignments are defined.

----
// CORRECT
local foo = [ "a", "b" ] ;
local bar = [
  "a",
  "b",
];

// INCORRECT
local baz = ["a", "b"];
----

* Start objects on the same line as the variables they're assigned to.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// PREFERRED
local foo = { hello: "world" };
local bar = {
  hello: "world",
};

// ACCEPTABLE
local baz =
  {
    hello: "world",
  };
----

* Objects within a conditional start on the same line as the condition.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// PREFERRED
local foo(x) =
  if x == 42 then {
    result: "The Answer",
  }
  else {
    result: "Don't know",
  };

// ACCEPTABLE
local bar(x) =
  if x == 42 then
    {
      result: "The Answer",
    }
  else
    {
      result: "Don't know",
    };
----

* Start `if` and `else` on new lines and prefer to keep `else if` together.
+
[sourece,jsonnet]
----
// PREFERRED
local foo(x) =
  if x < 42 then {
    result: "No enought",
  }

>   else if > 42 then {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  else if x > 42 then {
```

    result: "Too much",
  }
  else {
    result: "The Answer",
  }

// ACCEPTABLE
local bar(x) =
  if x < 42 then {
    result: "No enought",
  }
  else

>     if > 42 then {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    if x > 42 then {
```

=== Blank lines (vertical whitespace)

* A single blank line appears:
** Within functions bodies, as needed to create logical groupings of statements.
** Optionally before the first member or after the last member of a template or function.
* Use one or two blank line(s) to separate logical blocks in files.

>   Those blocks can be single function definitions or groups of local varaible that semantically belong together.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Those blocks can be single function definitions or groups of local variables that semantically belong together.
```

* Excessive number of blank lines is discouraged.

=== Defining and using abstractions

==== Defining templates

* Rather than defining a concrete JSON object, it's often useful to define a template which takes some set of parameters before being materialized into JSON.
+
[INFO]
====
Looking at this from the perspective of object oriented programming, this looks like a class.

> However it differs from classes, as the resulting object don't have methods.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However it differs from classes, as the resulting objects don't have methods.
```

From the Jsonnet perspective, this is just a regular function.

> When refering to this type of functions in specific, use the term _template function_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When specifically referring to this type of function, use the term _template function_.
```

====
* When defining a template function, use the following syntax:
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
local newAnimal(name, age) =
  {
    name: name,
    age: age,
  };

{
  newAnimal: newAnimal,
}
----

* When writing libraries, always return a single object encapsulating any functions instead of returning a single function.
  This allows returning multiple values (constants and functions) from a single library.
  Additionally this ensures libraries remain extensible without having to refactor all consumers.

> * When defining a template functio with both required and optional parameters, put required parameters first.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* When defining a template function with both required and optional parameters, put required parameters first.
```

}
----

== Defining functions

> * Don't define functions withing objects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Don't define functions within objects.
```

  Such objects will fail to render.

>   The exception to this rules is the last object within a library file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  The exception to this rule is the last object within a library file.
```

* Functions which return single values (rather than an object) should use parentheses `()` to enclose their bodies if they're multi-line, identically to how braces would be used.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
{
  multiply(number1, number2):
    (
      number1 * number 2
    ),
}
----

=== Using libraries

* Import all dependencies at the top of the file and given them names related to the imported file itself.
  This makes it easy to see what other files you depend on as the file grows.
+
[source,jsonnet]
----
// CORRECT
local animal = import "animal.libsonnet";
animal.newAnimal("Finnegan", 3);

// AVOID
(import "animal.libsonnet").newAnimal("Finnegan, 3);
----

> * Keep function parameters on one single or put one per line but don't mix the two styles.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Keep function parameters on a single line or put one parameter per line when calling functions.
* When putting one parameter per line for a function call, add a line break (`\n`) after the opening `(`.
```
